Come on, tell me honestly, what terrible things do you say to yourself that no one knows. One said, oh, I'm fat and ugly and I'll never lose weight. One said that my house is always dirty, I'm a really terrible stay-at-home mother. One said my children deserve better than me.
And when everyone finished telling me all that, they didn't know that I called each husband and asked him to send me a picture of them when they were little.
And I take out that picture, a little girl five fat, this big picture.
And I say, ok, now say the same things to this little girl.
And none could.
Each of them burst into tears.
I say, I can't, I can't say such awful things to that sweet little girl.
I say, and you say it every day, to that sweet little girl.
When I put that video on the internet, a lot of people told me, I now have a picture of myself as a child, small, and I put it somewhere, so that I can see it every day. And we have to learn that. We must learn to be gentle with ourselves. When we were little, we would never say such words to anyone, not even to ourselves when we look at that picture.
How do you say elevator pitch in English, if you wanted to tell someone who Kristina Kuzmic is, how would you pronounce it?
Now it is a little more difficult in Croatia.
I would say, an ordinary imperfect woman who has been through a lot and now wants to be for others what she needed when she was at the bottom.
So I use my creativity through videos, through books, through speeches at conferences, to simply add a little humor and hope and encourage people a little.
When did you feel that you started using humor? Do you have the feeling that humor was somehow a defense against what was happening in your life in those moments?
I have always used humor. I remember when I was 12 years old and I lived in Osijek and the war started. My mom and dad sent me to my grandparents so I wouldn't be in Osijek.
I get there too, they lived in Novi Sad, I get there, a day later my grandfather has a heart attack, I see him having a heart attack, I have to call an ambulance and all that happens, he ends up in the hospital, the next day I fall off my bike and cut my knee big.
all that, in 48 hours everything happened terribly.
Grandma takes me to visit him in the hospital.
And I, with 12 gojins and so much stress, my friends are in the low tide, I don't know what's happening with them.
I write a song.
My leg hurts, and my grandmother hurts.
He's taking me to the hospital to see my godchild.
Even then, I had to use humor somehow as therapy.
And at that time I didn't even think about it.
that it's some kind of therapy for me.
But that's...
I have such memories from my childhood, where humor was really always a kind of medicine for me.
Would you say today, when you are probably much more mature than when you were 12 years old, that humor is therapy or an escape from problems?
Do you mask it or actually process it through humor?
I think it can be both, but for me it is medicine.
Because it's not that I'm now ignoring my problems, ignoring my feelings and just joking about everything.
Especially people who already watch my videos or read my books know.
I actually enjoy both that, and the processing, and really feeling everything.
So, yes, humor can be a bad thing, if you just kind of ignore the important things.
But I need these two.
In the first book, I wrote how, for me, going through life without humor is like eating soup with a fork.
It will be ok, but you will miss so much, because humor really helps us.
Do you think laughter is healing?
Yes, it is for me, at least.
But not only me, I see it in my followers.
When I make a video about difficult things and then somehow add humor, Our body needs that.
Our body simply needs to laugh, to breathe a little from all that.
Let's relax a bit.
The world is too serious anyway.
Yes, we have to. I always tell my children find the funny.
You have to find the funny.
Do you think that, I mean, that's one of my challenges, you know, the topics I deal with here are quite difficult at times. Well, even mom knows. Well, son, come on, throw in some humor.
Well, you see how that lady was a vida de marine for you.
Maybe you, Damir, were looking at the sight of de marine.
As she is 80 and something years old, she is cheerful, optimistic, witty and relaxed. Come on, be more like a vida de marine.
I say, well, how can I do it when I don't know?
Can it be learned or...
Is this combination of serious and humorous actually possible?
Possible, I think, is important.
I often say that it's mine. I don't see myself as a brand, but when Iko asks me what it's like, who is your brand?
I always say hope and humor.
Hope and humor. I think it actually goes very well together. Because we are people who will feel all kinds of emotions.
And yes, we need vulnerable conversations, we need hope, we need to be honest, we need to talk openly about things that are uncomfortable and difficult, but at the same time you have to laugh, you have to find something funny in this strange life we live.
Really weird, isn't it?
Very strange.
Mine is very strange.
Did you expect to be doing what you are doing today?
At all.
I'm really, in a way, living a dream that I never even dreamed of.
Because when I was little, there were no social networks. I never thought I would write a book. When I moved to America, they made fun of me for how terrible my English was.
And then she wrote the books in English.
And especially that, I don't know how much we will talk about my story, but when I broke up as a very young woman with two small children, I hated myself so much and thought that I had nothing good to offer not only to the world, but even to my children.
So now, when I see that people not only watch my videos, but also write a comment that I helped them in some way, it's mind-blowing, as they say in Croatian.
Explode moz.
Just like that.
Maybe there are some better translations, but this is the literary translation.
Yes, yes.
Can you relate to that emotion?
when someone writes you a comment on YouTube, you really helped me, you gave me hope, you made me laugh.
Do you relate to that?
Yes, I think so.
Or maybe you feel like that today.
I, for one, have a problem connecting with it.
How do I mean connect?
You know when someone says thank you, you changed my life.
Is it for bragging or is it some kind of different feeling?
My first thought comes to me when he says something like that.
Bogotovo, you mentioned my life.
I always think, oh, don't give me any credit for that.
Because maybe something I said gave you a little hope, but if your life really changed, you really had to work hard on it.
Give yourself credit for that.
So I don't look at myself like, ah, I'm so wonderful, I'm changing people's lives.
I just think, oh, I'm so grateful that it helped someone a little.
Because a lot of people helped me too.
Maybe something like a spark that will encourage, maybe change.
Yes, yes.
How was that period of moving to America and those first years there, all the way to that first marriage?
That. I was a teenager and like all teenagers I was insecure. I was always a little different, strange, as you noticed from my wonderful song that I described when I was 12,
and then to move at that time to a completely new culture, I have no friends there, not only that, but my friends are in Osijek and Ratje, and I felt such guilt, like how am I allowed to enjoy everything there, everything is nice, and I moved with my parents, yes, my dad got the opportunity to be a professor at all the universities there. They always told us, we go until we things calm down in Croatia and then we return. And so it was difficult for me, I had no friends, they made fun of me at school, I was a weird immigrant to them.
And then I decided, I always liked to act and then I decided to join that drama group in high school and I finally found friends there because everyone is strange there and then it was a little easier for me.
And now I think that all these experiences actually somehow gave me, helped me to have empathy for teenagers, for people who were given something by life that maybe they didn't plan for. And then my parents were with me, when they decided to come back, I was already at college.
So the parents are back.
Yes, everyone is now in Zagreb and I was at university, I had a good time and then I graduated straight from university, I think, and three weeks later I got married.
I don't recommend getting married so young.
Children, if you listen, listen.
I got married and then in the first year of marriage I realized this was not good.
This marriage is really not healthy and I need to...
I need to leave.
I have to go.
That.
And maybe a week later, just when I decided ok, that's it.
I find out I'm pregnant.
And I think, oh, oh, no way.
Is it the first child or the second?
First, first.
I also think, there is no chance that my child will grow up in a divorced home.
No chance.
Somehow we will fix it, everything will be wonderful, everything will be fine.
And then I had a son and somehow my life became completely like a child's, I didn't even think about how unhealthy a marriage actually is.
And then very quickly, he was, I think, 90 months old when I got pregnant with my daughter.
And then, when my daughter was a year and a half old, some things finally happened that I don't talk about publicly because of my children.
Where I decided I must now leave.
I heard one, how do you say quote?
Quote.
That. Someone said, I'm ringing in English now.
It is better for children to come from a broken home than to live in a broken home.
It is better for children to come from a broken home than to be kept in a broken one.
That. And when I read it, everything was clear to me. I suddenly knew.
Because I was afraid I would destroy the children if I divorced.
And then I realized no, no, no, no, actually it will be better for them too.
And today, let's say with this maturity that you have right now, do you see some way how it could have worked or...
Do you see what people actually often... It's hard to find a balance sometimes, like how much is my responsibility.
I try to think in a way that everything is my responsibility.
That.
Ok, you've made the decision that you want to step on that man, but like that?
what I like about my first marriage, I really tried, we went to therapy together and I didn't go until I really felt it, I tried everything and now when I look at it and how hard it was and especially after I broke up it was a horror, I'm not a body to ask for money, I'm not a body for anything, I'm one body away and no drama I'm not a body So I ended up very poor I couldn't save up for me and the children I shared a small room with them I had a roommate in another I slept on the floor in my room until my friend gave me a mattress. I think it was very difficult for me, but not only financially, but I felt like a failure. Like I made a stupid decision. But I don't even regret that decision. Because now I have these wonderful children. But they deserve a better mother than me. When I broke up on the 27th of Linka.
With two small children.
That. And this was so hard for me and I really hated myself. I had no confidence whatsoever. Now I look at that 27-year-old Kristina and I'm so proud of her, I could cry.
What a difficult decision it was.
And that I decided that and then, even though it was so hard, every day I got up and did everything I could for those children to make it nice for them, even though it was hard for us.
It's such an interesting perspective now, like 20 shits later, how I look at those days completely differently. I can still see that they were very difficult, but I am so proud of myself.
And now, especially since I'm in my second marriage, I actually see even more how unhealthy the first one was.
Because now I have something that is the complete opposite.
And the eyes too, I wasn't perfect, of course, a woman in my first marriage.
It's not that I was all wonderful and he was a horror.
Of course, we all make mistakes, we are not always the best.
But yes, I think I made a good decision.
And even, now I'm skipping a bit, but I want to say, my oldest son, We'll talk about him a little later. When he was going through difficult days, we were some kind of psychotherapist together, me and him. The psychotherapist also asks him, do you think that the divorce of your parents, how did it affect you negatively? Did that maybe somehow lead to that depression and what you're feeling now?
And he thought for a while and said, no, because if they hadn't split up, I wouldn't have Filip. Filip is my husband now. Because my husband is such a support to him. I immediately started crying too.
Because I still, even though I knew I made a good decision, I think every parent still feels some guilt when they make that decision.
Like, no one wants children to grow up in a divorced home. And I always felt a little guilty, even though I still knew that I had made a good decision.
And when I heard that from my son, it somehow healed so much of me.
Yes, maybe you felt some guilty conscience.
That.
that this was the cause of his problems later.
Well, that took Teresa's heart out of you.
And my daughter says the same thing, she is so grateful, they even went a couple of times, they are the ones now, a couple of times they are the order, we can't imagine you and dad together.
What would that even look like?
It doesn't make any sense to them.
And they respect and really love my brother so much.
How many people stay in such marriages for the rest of their lives?
It is somehow especially here in the Balkans, still a little.
Especially in the older generations, it is ingrained.
An opinion is like staring until death.
Yes, and to tell you the truth, there were people, I won't say which people, who were very, very angry with me when I stayed.
Like, how can you do something like that?
How can you do that to children?
But what's interesting, when I look at the marriages of those people, those marriages are really unhappy and somehow it seems to me that people who are, who feel that they have to stay in an unhappy marriage, when someone else has the courage to leave it, it's like how you condemn yourself when I had to stay in an unhappy one. What do you think we should hear the story of your ex-husband now, that now he wrote a book and that he was going like this, that he was doing a tour, what would you hear what his side of the story was, I'm not sure now that you see each other, we assume that you are in some kind of contact that because I made the decision and it was also really difficult, they hated each other so much when I was me, he was the person that I left him, I was the person that this act did not try in therapy to at least try to fix something and then I decided that was sometime after a couple of months I moved into my small apartment with a roommate, and that's all because I don't want my children every time, because they would be with him almost every weekend, when he comes to pick them up so that they can see someone, I don't know, we didn't even talk once, you could feel it, that tension, and I didn't want that for my children, and then I called him and said Listen, come to dinner and we'll be together with the children. You and they don't have to talk at all. We can only talk about children. And if they have us together, if they feel that it's ok, if we don't hate each other, he has no chance.
I think that around the seventeenth time when I called him, he finally said yes. And he came. And then it went slowly, I always invited him to everything, I don't know if you celebrate Father's Day there.
Yes, at night, yes. It's not very popular.
I mean, it should be.
Women's Day and Mother's Day are popular somehow.
Let's change that. Father's Day should be just as important. Mostly for Father's Day I would make a picnic for them.
and I would say to the children ok, now dad will pick him up and you take him out on a picnic and things like that, I wasn't in love with him, I didn't want to win him back, but simply for the children to see that even though we are separated, that there doesn't have to be hatred and that was it for a long time until somehow he softened a little and now he still comes, they are now grown up but let's say my daughter just had her 20th birthday, I immediately called him and said it was on Saturday, come and when I started with a new one, I told him listen, I'll tell you right now my ex is always welcome in my home because of the children and if you're not ok with that I completely understand but I'm not the woman you should be and he's just as wonderful before him because of the children.
So, to answer you, that is the question now.
I think that at that time she was writing a book, it must have been that, I have no idea why she left me.
That would be the title of the book.
I have no idea.
That would be called a book.
And now, now I think maybe...
Oh, I have no idea. I have no idea now, you see.
I have no idea.
I think he understands and knows more than he might admit.
I don't know if there is.
He is not as open as I am to admit his problems.
And why are you so open to admit your problems?
You mean, is it for this one?
That you can help someone?
Is this also some kind of part of therapy?
Maybe treatment?
Because even as a child, whenever I pretended that everything was ok when it wasn't or I pretended that I didn't know, I was somehow a fake, it was such a terrible feeling, I just couldn't do it, I was terrified, I don't know if I'm the kind of person born that I don't like being fake, and I also think that a lot of people who don't share their problems or their insecurities, think that I have to be as perfect as possible in order to be loved.
And I actually believe the opposite. I think that people need and want and love people who are real people, not fakes.
I had a very strange insight for you the other day.
Can I share it with you?
Yes, please.
You know how in our Western culture, Christianity is dominant and influential in societies.
And actually one of the most extreme symbols we have seen in our lives is Jesus on the cross.
I think that I have come to some conclusion as to why this is so and why this symbol exists.
Now it has nothing to do with theology, with religion.
Just my interpretation.
And somehow it builds on what she just told you.
I realized that, for example, people who are depressed and who are defending themselves from the outside world are somehow huddled together as if they are protecting themselves.
And people who decide to show themselves to the world and spread themselves and say this is me do this.
And this is Jesus on the cross. What does it mean when you show who you are, judgment, criticism, wounding, but then actually after that, if you go through it, if you have courage and so on, you rise again.
And then you can actually be what actually creeps you out.
It's really...
It's hard to show off.
It is, but I think it's difficult at first. Or do you get used to it?
I mean, it's always hard to be vulnerable the first, second, fifth time.
Then you kind of get used to drinking ranja.
And you get used to the fact that of course there will be people who will criticize you.
I think it would be strange if no one criticized me.
That would actually be weird.
That I don't have haters.
Haters, is that how you talk?
Those who hate you.
Yes, yes.
If everyone liked me, if everyone thought I was great, that would be very strange.
In fact, it's normal that of course there will be people who will think, and she's stupid, she's too vulnerable, why is she so honest.
I'm used to it. And I don't really mind.
Did you read, or do you read the comments on your videos today or not anymore?
Have you read it before?
That's why I read, I don't read everything, because I don't have time to read everything, but I read on purpose because I think that in a way, precisely because of what it is, I share my life and I'm vulnerable, people somehow feel that they know me and that I'm someone for them, that I'm their friend. And then I like every day at least five, I give myself, come on, you have to answer at least five comments.
And often these comments simply want to know that someone has read their words, that they are not alone. And then I like to give them that support. And then of course if I read, then I will also see terrible comments.
But what can I do with them, people are boring.
So, today you don't really feel a negative comment anymore.
He doesn't touch you like he used to.
I even said this to my audience last time that I will no longer read comments.
Somehow new audiences keep coming.
This regular audience knows who I am and what I am, so they know how to be gentle with me.
And now somehow it started to grow exponentially.
A lot of new people are coming, they have never seen me before and then, no matter what these stories are, no matter what this, no matter what that.
When I first started uploading videos and read a negative comment, I, like most people, would think a little too much about that comment.
I would carry that comment with me throughout the day, oh, do other people think the same way, do I need to change?
All those stupid thoughts.
I am a very visual person.
And then they decided on me, this is how it is.
I'll see it as a suitcase.
Each of us carries suitcases throughout life.
We have a suitcase of insecurities, we have a suitcase of our worries, we have a suitcase of business stress, we all have a lot of suitcases.
And we go through life with these suitcases.
And when someone takes their time from their life to write me something horrible, they actually take that suitcase of theirs, their misfortunes, their dissatisfaction, everything they don't like about themselves and their life and give it to me.
They say take that suitcase. Because their comments 90% of the time are not really me.
They are unhappy people and they think that if they give me that misfortune, they will get rid of it, and we know that it will not work. And then I simply decided, I bought too many suitcases that people gave me. Not just on social media, but when I was little from adults who told me I wasn't smart enough or not enough whatever. I bought those suitcases. I carried so many of those suitcases and I simply decided that when someone wrote me such a comment, I would just give them the suitcase and say no thanks.
And I won't pick up the suitcase.
I have my own weight, my dear, I don't feel like it.
Yes, I have my suitcase.
I don't need another one. No thanks.
And that may sound simple, but it helped me so much. And even I sometimes when I see a terrible commemoration, even if you are ugly, fat, stupid, I just write no thanks and they are completely confused.
Why not thank you?
I was offended. No thanks.
I don't want my suitcase.
That.
This analogy is completely clear to me, this story is completely clear to me.
Now you're going to fuck him.
I always, somehow put it my way now, my belief, that nothing is completely black and white.
I mean, this podcast is black and white, stop kidding.
But it seems like there are a lot of nuances.
Well, there is a spectrum of something, but there is little more subtle.
That.
I wonder, from the feedback that comes to us, we still need to think about whether there is any truth in any of this feedback and how to distinguish it, aha, maybe you could work on this, make yourself a little more aware of it, maybe there is truth in it or maybe not, you know, not all feedback comes in a constructive way, when there is a person to think, anything can be brainstorming, anything can be. messing around, it's nice to let a person have space to mature and so on.
Do you understand what I'm trying to say? How to distinguish these shades?
Because I think it's at least obvious to me when someone just wants to be a negative person.
It makes a big difference when someone says you're an idiot, blah blah blah blah.
and when someone says, well, you know what, you haven't thought about this. You made that video, but you didn't think about the people who have the situation I have and it doesn't work. Then I love it when someone writes me a comment like that. Because I'm an open person and I don't think I'm smart and know everything. And I want to learn about others. That's a big difference. I don't see those comments as criticism. I look at those comments as something I have learned and will do better now. And even I made a couple of videos where I said, I made this video and then someone told me their story and I changed something because I really learned something new.
I don't see it as haters.
If you see every opinion, I don't even like to call it criticism, as negative because someone doesn't agree with you one hundred percent, then maybe you are the problem.
Not you, you, but...
Yes, yes, yes, yes.
Don't argue.
I started, they see that I am a bit of a philosophical type.
Yeah, like it with that.
That picture of Jesus still haunts me now.
That.
Let's say, What concerns the truth, when we search for the truth, we can search for the truth in society, we can search for the truth in our lives, we can search for some kind of absolute truth, about existence, the universe and so on.
And it's always interesting to know, say, when you're looking for the truth, let's say, let's go like this in some kind of private life that you've shared a little bit with the public, through your videos that you make.
I think that the truth actually consists of all these different perceptions and subjectivities of everything.
It's not just the truth that you see or what those five people who commented on you see, but it's all the truth.
That.
And let's say that, that is called the process of dialectics. There is thesis, antithesis and synthesis.
So when you put it all together, you get the overall picture, and that's actually the truth.
Yes, yes.
Here?
That. Well, I think so, that's why I really like listening to other people's opinions.
And again, it's very obvious to me, I think it's obvious to most people, when someone simply tries to throw away their misfortune.
That's another story.
And I don't know, it's much more interesting for me to sit and have a conversation with someone who might have a different opinion than me, than someone who will just say, yes, yes, yes, I agree, I agree, I agree, everything you say.
That's right, actually the best way to find out the truth is to sit down with the person you hate, right?
And there really isn't enough of it in this world. Because people only want to be around people who agree with them one hundred percent on everything. And I think that's why we somehow become dumber and dumber.
I really realized that I had a couple of encounters with people with whom I got into some stronger conflicts in my life, and I'm actually very grateful for those people with every little retrospection.
They revealed a lot about me.
That.
They really helped me.
You know, the one later when five years or ten years had passed, I said that myself, thank you man.
That.
They really helped me.
I often think that, let's say, well, we won't talk about politics now.
You can, whatever you learn.
No, I don't want to, but I take this as an example.
In America, I think the whole world knows, politics is what it is, I don't know what word to use.
Basically, both sides can't listen to each other at all.
At all. Even when they have, I don't know how to say it in raskom, debates, presidential debates.
Nobody listens. Everyone has already decided what they think and what they want to say, and that's it. Even as a parent, one of the most important things I had to learn was to shut up and listen.
And if all people would simply listen a little more and really listen out of a real desire to know, not to listen to immediately decide how I will respond to that and to convince him that I am right, but that real desire to know is so important in creativity and in friendship and in life.
If you had actually written down that one statement of yours, it really meant a lot to me. This is now a continuation of what I just said, knowing desires, not assumptions. So not to assume, but to be desired to know, to discover the truth, and you said, now I translated it, it was in Croatian somehow, maybe there is no good word for oh, to stand in the presence and wonder of his story, for example, you said that in the context of Luka's story about his son, but?
Yes, I wrote it in English, stand in awe of his story.
Because I think like parents, but again it's not just about parents.
We assume that we know exactly what our child needs.
To know exactly who our child is.
We keep assuming.
And in fact, we often assume because we think that if we are a good parent, then of course we will know what is best for our child.
if we are smart, then we mean what our child needs and when I am, and that is actually the first mistake I made, one of many first mistakes, that I made when I found out that my son was depressed, I thought, ok, I know what it is, I know what is needed, I know how we will know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I didn't know anything and until I became eager to know I simply decided that I have to put it in how did you say it in Croatian?
In wonder. Yes, his stories.
In presence. That.
Not what I want his story to be or what I think his life story is.
All of us, parents, have a dream of what we want our children to be, what kind of life we want to have.
But simply, to get rid of all that and be one hundred percent curious.
Who are you?
And only you really know what you need, what will help you. I don't know.
I must simply be a student.
And that was such a difference with us when I simply decided not to know.
You actually said at one point that it looks like you were making the port run with a broken leg.
Let's say, but given that you assumed what was wrong with him and how you could help him.
You didn't even know what position he was in, where he was.
that I would go to his room in the morning, why are you still in bed, do you have to go to school and all my questions that would seem like normal questions to your parents, why are you late again, how come you're failing at school, she would even say how I can help you to be better, to be more obedient, and he would say all these, all these questions are actually shouting, you're not good enough And when someone is already depressed, he hears questions What kind of criticism is each of those questions Although I didn't think it was criticism at the time, I thought it was normal questions from parents When you already feel terrible That won't help You feel even more like a loser And I need him Every day You have to go to school You have to get this grade Why this, why this And then one day I go into his room He was at school and I find a small piece of paper on his desk and open it.
Because I went there every day, when he started to be depressed, he used drugs so that he wouldn't feel anything.
And I would go every morning and look for that drug so I could get it for him too.
And I find that paper and his goal for the day is written on the paper.
to get up on time, to go to school, to take a shower, to brush my teeth.
I also immediately cried at night when I realized all these things that I kept telling him.
Not that he knew, of course he did, our children are not stupid.
He knew, but he was in a state of depression and then I realized that with all that, come on, come on, you have to do this, why this, if I was what you said, I expected someone with a broken leg to run.
I wasn't focused enough on the root of the problem at all, I just watched what was happening and what he was doing. I'll ask you later what you think today, what is the root of the problem, but before I ask you, I would like to comment. Tomislav Kuljiš was my guest and we talked about parenting, and he told me an interesting sentence. He took it in the context of, say, a mother, so he said it doesn't matter if the mother is a good mother, but that the mother is well.
That is very important.
How did you, for example, feel in those years before he got depressed?
When did he actually feel and when did you feel that he was not well?
How did you feel?
I mean, I was the first to blame myself and I felt like, whenever I tried something and it didn't work, why I don't know, what's wrong with me, we often do that, I think especially parents, and maybe even more negoci mothers, I'm not sure, because I've never been a father, but life is already hard for us, and parenting is hard.
And then when it's the hardest, then instead of being good to ourselves, to be okay, we make it difficult, even more difficult, because we add that I'm not good enough, all our insecurities suddenly become stronger for her, I don't know why, what's wrong with me, I'm stupid, my child deserves better than me and we actually take it all hard, so we have no control and then what we can control, how we treat ourselves, we decide no, no, no, we'll add it all and make life even harder.
So I have to teach her to simply be very good to herself.
and accept that I can be a very smart and very good mother and still not know how.
And that it's okay.
And I did the same, I didn't at first, but through those years I realized, I am his example.
So if I don't take good care of myself, how can I expect him to take good care of himself?
If I criticize myself properly, how can I expect him not to criticize himself?
And when he becomes a father one day, if he becomes a father, he has a child.
And if that child has a hard time, I don't want him to think, oh, now I'm stupid or I can't take care of myself.
And I want him to have the example of a mother who said, what, I'm important.
I have to prioritize myself as well.
I have to take good care of myself.
So that he learns from that example and takes good care of himself.
It's a bit of a platitude actually, but when we try to think about it, it's quite strange how we treat ourselves.
When you hear that inner dialogue, how we talk to each other, I often catch myself in that.
and the question of why we talk more nicely with our best friend than with ourselves.
At least my inner dialogue is like that quite often. I am very strict with myself, let's say.
I'm the same, what I said earlier, no thanks, to the suitcases of others, I had to learn to say no thanks to that little devil in my brain. And often when I start saying no thank you, No, no, no, thank you.
But, I don't know, I think that what you said, let's say, the way we are, we are better than other people. I once made a video, I don't know, 5-6 years ago and I asked four friends, do you want to be in the video, you can later say no and I won't put you on, but I won't tell you anything, I just need you to come and be really honest and vulnerable.
Ok, one by one they came to me. I said, we had a camera, we recorded everything, come on, tell me honestly, what terrible things are you saying to yourself that no one knows.
One said, oh, I'm fat and ugly and I'll never lose weight. One said, well, my house is always dirty, I feel, I'm a really terrible housewife, mother.
One said my children deserve better than me.
One said I'm a selfish, disgusting person.
And of course when she finished telling me all that, they didn't know that I called each husband and asked him to send me a picture of them when they were little.
I take out that picture too.
A little girl five-legged.
Such a big picture.
And I say ok, now say the same things to this little girl.
And none could.
Each of them burst into tears I say I can't, I can't Say such horrible things to that sweet little girl I say and every day you say that to that sweet little girl And since I put that video on the souls of the net Many people told me I now have a picture of myself As a small, small And I put it somewhere I always see it everyday And we have to learn to learn to be gentle with ourselves We would never say to anyone, We must not even say to ourselves when we look at that picture when we were little, we would never say such words spoke.
This was really strong.
That. How much does that visual that you just gave us help you, like when I was talking about Jesus on the cross a little while ago, right? That. When you remember yourself as a small child.
One woman is...
It totally changes your perspective, doesn't it?
Yes, one woman wrote to me after that and said, after I gave birth, I don't know how long I had two, three children, I hate my body and how I look so much.
And every time I take a shower, I get out of the shower, I have a big watch in there and I just like it.
And she said, I printed a big picture of myself as a small one and put the binoculars on it.
And he says, that's the first thing I see when I get out of the shower and I won't talk about myself like that anymore.
I cried when I read that.
Or do you pay often?
I often pay, yes. I would say everyday.
I eat, sleep, pay everyday.
I eat, sleep and pay.
And you smile.
Yes, I have to.
I have to tell you that I think it's for you.
The way we feel today, the energy in this room is beautiful.
You said at one point, We can talk a little about it now, when that, let's say, perhaps the most difficult part in your son's life was over, that it was actually a love story between a mother and a son.
That.
Can you tell a little about that love story?
Yes, I actually didn't see it that way at first. I signed the contract for the book and of course my son was fully involved in it all and I started writing.
And I cry every day, I'm all anxious, suddenly my fear is back because I have to remember all those days. And not only to remember all those days, but in detail so that I would write that book. I also felt some, as they say, PTSD, PTSD.
I mean, I can't believe that I decided to do this, that I'm going to write this book now. And I talk to my psychotherapist and say, I don't know how, but I will try to, like, that contract.
You interrupt. Yes, stop, stop, I can't, I can't write this.
And I say he to me, so Kristina, you are writing a love story.
I still can't say it without getting sick. You are writing a love story between a mother and a son.
And it completely changed my perspective.
And then I'm sitting there paying, paying again, and I think, yes, even through the hardest days, actually especially through those hardest days, it was a love story. And now I'm thinking about any problem, maybe it's not that, maybe something much smaller with my little son, when I'm having a hard time, when I have that difficult day as a parent.
I mean, I'm living a love story now.
That.
How do you find strength in those most difficult moments?
After the divorce, she is alone with two children, a single mother, no money, her son is depressed, he has problems with addiction. How do you find strength in those moments anyway?
I think it depends on how we define strength. Sometimes strength to me looks like staying in bed a little too long.
Sometimes the strength seems to be crying for three hours alone in the toilet in the basement where no one can see me.
Sometimes strength means simply doing something for yourself and not feeling selfish.
But I don't know, I don't know how to give up.
You just have to.
I had to accept that this is not some time, slowly everything will get better.
I knew that if it was better one day, it would be worse the next day maybe.
And that's ok. Simply accepting to take each day one by one and often during that time I even thought, ok, hour by hour, maybe even minute by minute.
How will we survive this minute?
How will we survive this hour?
I can't even worry about tomorrow, but what can I do now?
And accept the same, don't let what is out of my control completely control me.
And to simply say ok what can I do now there is always something I can do now maybe it's just to write my son some nice message maybe I'll go for a walk to leave the house where everything is tense but step by step I had no other choice step by step this was very important to me when you said I don't know how to give up I don't know if it's the first time you've said it now and you've come to your senses or maybe now for the first time maybe now for the first time out loud I don't know how to give up I think when something is so important I can't imagine what's more important to me than my children, then it's impossible to give up, that's the love story, you don't give up. And that was the most important thing for me when my son was having a hard time.
I saw how much he hated himself.
I saw how difficult it was for him.
And I wanted him to know that even there and in those moments, even when you're on drugs and angry and what other people would see as a horrible person.
Even then, you are so loved, I love you so much, you deserve love so much.
I think that sometimes when we feel the worst, we deserve love, that we don't deserve mercy or forgiveness.
It seems to me that this kind of behavior is a symptom of a huge search for love.
That. Often when he was angry with me, when he had that rage during depression, He went to me the most. Later he told me, mom, because I knew you wouldn't leave me. I had to do something with that and I knew that you are firm and that you won't want me, that you love me so much that you won't leave me. So, some very screwed up compliment.
But hey, at that time I thought, wow, he hates me and then later I found out, no, no, no, he hates himself. He hates himself. And I have to prove to him that he has no reason to hate himself.
If I know who he is. Even when he acts like that. I know his heart. I know he has a good heart. I know that he is suffering, that it is difficult for him, and I am not saying that the way he behaves is okay. Of course it's not ok. But I know who you are. I know who you are and I love you.
I guess now is a quieter period for some.
Oh, now it's wonderful.
Is. Yes, now...
How many years have passed since those events and the most difficult period, let's say?
He said that he started feeling depressed around 12, I didn't notice anything until about 13, then I thought, then I assumed, I thought too much, and that's a teenager, a typical teenager.
And then he was 14 years old when I simply asked him, I didn't even plan to ask, somehow it came out to me, have you ever had the thought of taking your own life? And thank God he was honest with me and said yes.
that, the whole world changes when you hear something like that as a parent.
And from then until about 3-4 years, it was very, very, very difficult.
Very difficult.
And at that time I had to call the police, I was in the hospital, it was really difficult.
And then around 17 it was as up and down, up and down as mental health goes.
But now for the last two years it's really good.
At that time when it was the worst, if someone had told me that we would be this close now.
That he would be so good to me.
Now I'm in Croatia, in America.
Every couple of days he sends me a message.
I am so thankful for you, Mom.
Do you know how much you know me?
I'm waiting for him to ask me for money or something.
Why are you writing this to me?
No, he just wants to tell me.
They are so close to us.
I couldn't imagine it for them.
And me because of that PTSD, the cheese that says, when things were better and he would come towards me, let's say I'm cooking in the kitchen and he comes towards me and I immediately, all that, I'm tense, I think, now he'll shout, now he'll do something, and he'll come and hug me.
And I had to do that, I had to attend a lot of psychotherapy courses, so that I could somehow learn to change what I expected from him and accept that it is real, that it is better.
I still sometimes have anxiety when I see, for example, that he doesn't live at home anymore, but he sleeps over almost every day, he comes over for a night or two and if I see him, I think he sleeps too much.
Or why doesn't she eat? Why does he eat so little?
The anxiety immediately returned to me.
And then I learned to say to that anxiety, I'll let you know if I need you.
I don't need you now. I know you want to help me. I don't need you now. And that somehow helps me. Simply, somehow tell that anxiety.
in fact, it was quite unfortunate that in that period when the child becomes a teenager, this same problem and such illness occurs, because you cannot generally distinguish whether these are normal teenage problems, flies, bugs in the head and so on, or is it some kind of more serious problem that how did you generally understand what helped you the most during that period? Of all the things you've tried, what would you say helped you the most?
I noticed that he doesn't just separate from mom and dad, like a lot of teenagers. He separates himself from his friends. He separates himself from anything that used to bring him happiness. When I found out that he was taking drugs and drinking, it wasn't the same with his friends, going out, partying. He is alone in his room.
drank the whole bottle of wine as fast as possible. I found a small bag with sugar because he would pour it into the bottle so that he could drink it as quickly as possible.
I thought that was not normal teenage behavior.
And let's say, I don't know, in the seventh, eighth grade they have all fives.
Suddenly falling.
I mean, that's the huge difference.
So I knew something was wrong, and he didn't even know how to describe it. I think, many times people, parents ask, what is it? What happened? And teenagers, even us adults, sometimes don't know how to describe when we're having a hard time, we don't know what's happening in our body.
He didn't know and then he would say, I don't know, leave it alone. From the beginning, I saw it as, before I knew that I was on drugs, before I threatened all that, I looked at him somehow, which is just general to say now, but I'll be honest, like a naughty child.
I really believe that the children that people call naughty, almost 100%, are not naughty, but suffer. Suffer. There is a reason why they act like that.
our job as a parent and to somehow find out that reason, to somehow really focus on the root of the problem.
Because when he behaved like that and shouted at me and this and that, I would punish him. That didn't help.
Because you cannot punish the press.
I remember at that time, people would tell me, well, you just have to be stricter with him. You have to, don't let him do this, don't do this and take his phone.
And I tried, I tried all kinds of punishments.
And that's it, everything got worse.
You cannot punish depression or any mental illness.
It cannot be punished.
We tried everything too.
He went to therapy.
Then that psychotherapist said that he thinks it's more real.
That maybe they should see a psychiatrist.
He started taking the medicine.
Those medicines did not help.
Then we tried other drugs.
I mean, that was...
And it's always mentally a little bit very difficult.
It's complicated.
It's good that he wanted to take medicine at all.
Well, at first it wasn't.
But I think so much became desperate.
And I am like a naive mother who wanted to encourage him.
And she said, listen, that will help you.
And when it didn't help right away, you know what helps right away?
The drug helps immediately.
Because then I don't feel anything.
Then he actually started using drugs even more.
I take this and immediately feel better.
And I have to wait three months for this to start working at all, then it doesn't work, then I have various symptoms because of it and this, not symptoms, as they say, side effects.
Follow up. That.
I think he tried somewhere around 14 different medicines until we finally found something that helped.
And I just want to say that if anyone listens to fight, don't give up.
mental health is very complicated, but there is something that will help you, and what actually helped him the most, and that's why he actually decided to write the book with me, he started going to support groups, at first he didn't want to, and then like come on, you can be with teenagers for 3 hours, something is Monday for 3 hours, on Wednesday for 3 hours and then on Saturdays we went together as a family with other families and he met other teenagers there he sits there and those teenagers like that they talk openly about what he really feels, and he's never heard someone his age talk about it so openly.
And for the first couple of weeks he was silent and suddenly he started talking to them openly.
And he told me later, mom, I felt that I wasn't crazy, that it wasn't something abnormal with me, but simply, here, I have this mental illness, other people have it too, I see how they get better, after how much better, maybe I will get better too, it helped him so much, we have a whole chapter in the book about how much these groups helped him.
And I think that, even if there are no such groups in Croatia, I think it proves that we have to talk about it openly, we have to. Because when you tell someone something that they feel, and they are ashamed of it or think it is not okay to say it out loud, and you hear it, that feeling and I do the same, it actually heals us so much, that we know we are not alone.
What's going on in your head?
Traba makes these uncomfortable silences a little difficult.
So, are you the same with your son?
She was silent and stood.
And watched.
Even in that one, more like, everyone is a little like that, everyone became a little uncomfortable.
I kept quiet a little longer, didn't I?
But to that my wife just like.
why are you looking at me like that? I can't read your mind.
I see that something is happening in your brain, that's why I asked.
Something is happening.
Maybe I'm hungry.
That.
So, today is good.
Is. And if you asked him, he would say just like that.
He would say, I'm fine today.
Because he always wants to be very honest with people, especially since we shared our story publicly.
If mental illness isn't something you reach for, mental health is still wonderful.
He still has hard days.
A year ago, just last summer, it was very difficult for him.
Very difficult.
I'm all over, now my fear is back because I saw a big change in him.
And then I found out that he stopped taking his medicine because he thought, well, I'm better.
Now I can do without.
And I can't do without it.
And well, then he started five meds and now he's fine, but he still has rough days.
And he is very honest with me. He calls me or comes to me and says today is a really hard day.
But the difference is, after so many years of therapy and those support groups and drugs and doctors and all that, he knows what helps him and knows what he needs.
And he often says, you know mom, depression lies to me.
And I have to do the opposite of what my depression tells me.
Depression tells me to stay in bed all day.
Then when I notice that, oh, I want to stay in bed all day, that means I have to get up, the exact opposite I always do.
When depression tells me, you're not hungry, you don't have to eat today.
I have to eat something. When I want to isolate myself, no.
I have to pick up the phone and call a friend.
And make a plan with a friend.
So, he simply understands, he says, when I'm having a hard day, then I know I have to do exactly the opposite of what I want.
I assume that there are people who were depressed, were on medication, and later came off the medication and are still alive today.
Without that, someone who may never have had such an experience, so maybe from the outside she would think for herself.
I crossed paths with Aleksandar Stanković, well, you were with him as well.
What if he thinks, ok, I just need to get my life in order, I need to have, spend time outside in nature, I need to be physically active, I need to have a good quality diet, a rich quality social life, be good to myself.
You know, she's laying some healthy foundations and I won't need medicine.
For example, when I spoke with Aleksandar, he told me that he satisfied everything and still could not do without medication.
Because it's not just me thinking, it depends again, mentally it's always complicated.
There are different types.
There are places more situational.
There are clinical places.
My son believes, I have no idea, I'm not a doctor. He believes that somehow he will always struggle with it. Especially since he tried it without drugs. Well, he's still young now. Who knows, hormones are another thing, who knows how it will be when he is 30-40 years old.
But I think it is important to know that there is no shame if you have to take it.
Maybe you don't need a doctor in this life.
That is also wonderful. But if you need it, take it as you would if you had diabetes, as you said.
Yes, yes, yes. Or whatever, somehow people feel, if I take medicine, if I have to take medicine, then I am weak.
We need to stop seeing it as mental health.
Somehow you need something a little more than a walk and meditation.
Yes, maybe people think that it is not natural as it is not part of nature.
I want to live like any other healthy person.
That.
Naturally from the food that the earth gives me, the sun and so on.
Then they may feel unhappy and frustrated that they can't.
Why can Marko and I can't?
That. But again, a disease is a disease. I don't know if they would feel that way about taking medication for something that is not a mental illness.
I often think, the most important thing for me is to be able to achieve this, and I don't think I will be able to before I die, it would be the happiest, if we can completely get rid of that shame when it comes to mental illness.
Because I often think, for example, when someone has a headache, they go to their mom, dad, wife, whoever, hey, do you have something, really, I have a headache.
They immediately say, there's no shame, there's no shame, oh, I don't want anyone to know, my head hurts, and then he takes medicine and he's better.
If only the body could tell you, if it looked at mental illness that way. And if a child or even an adult would go up to someone and say hey, I don't feel good.
I don't know exactly what it is, but I don't feel well.
I need something.
How many people would actually still be there who are no longer there?
That they simply felt that it was normal, that it was okay to ask for help.
That there is nothing strange about them. That they are not abnormal.
But here, I'm not okay.
I need help.
maybe it's a question of what, if we hit each other and I don't know now, some muscle hurts so we apply some kind of gel over it so that it hurts less, let's say with globes or something like that you say, maybe we have a sore throat, let's take some throat medicine for the throat, they are all somehow parts of our body or something, and maybe this is when we identify our psyche with what we really are. And then maybe people wonder why I take medicine to cure what I really am.
It's not my hand, it's me. This is still my hand, my...
We tie our value to too many things that are beyond our control.
My son wrote in the view he wrote why should I feel shame about mental illness when I didn't choose it.
I can feel the shame I was towards my mother when it was the hardest for me.
I can feel shame for stealing money to make friends.
I feel ashamed and I apologized and that's all.
Why should you feel shame for something that I did not choose and decide?
And that's the problem. We attach our value to things that are not at all under our control. And that's not fair.
And that's what parents do with their children when their children are suffering.
For a while, I tied my worth to his problems, to his insecurities, whatever.
My value was tied there.
That's not fair. It's not fair to me, it's not fair to him.
You made a great video where you described the attitude towards mental illnesses throughout the ages.
That.
What was at the beginning a few thousand years before Christ, the Middle Ages.
It was quite interesting to see actually.
And until a few years ago, and maybe a decade, it was a huge taboo topic.
Maybe I could give a short story if you still remember the concept of how you are.
Yes, I don't remember exactly what it was for each decade, but the one that started where I don't know what kind of raclava it was.
She's a witch, burn her. Yes, practice.
That. And then lobara, I don't know how to say it. He was lobotomized. Yes, yes, yes.
And then even in the eighties, don't tell anyone.
Well, don't, everything will be fine.
So go, pray. Just pray.
I'm interested in someone having a heart attack in front of you.
I would tell you, just pray.
He wouldn't, he would call for help.
But unfortunately Even though it was that I wanted to show that things slowly changed At the end of the video I wrote But we're not where we need to be We're not yet Because I'm still even reading the comments And did you pray for him?
Have you tried going for a walk every morning?
And what did he eat?
Did he eat healthy? Did he eat enough vegetables?
I mean, you wouldn't say something like that to someone who has cancer, for example.
This is a problem and I don't know if I will, I said in another interview about this story, as I wrote in the book that he was hospitalized in a psychiatric hospital.
And everything that I share on social regimes in books, I always ask my children for permission. Mainly.
He was hospitalized some six months before that and we didn't talk about it.
We did not write in the book.
But when he was hospitalized that first time, I put it on social networks, he also allowed me a picture of him in the hospital and the comments were wonderful.
Oh, is everything okay, oh, I wish you all the best, I'm sending all my love, everything positive.
And then later when we shared that second hospitalization after some time, the comments, some were good, but a lot of criticism, condemnation, so what's wrong with you talking about it so publicly?
And the difference was that the first hospitalization was for appendicitis, and the second was for depression.
And the same thing that happened on the second one, so many people wrote, wow, how brave you are, you and Luka are so brave to share that.
No one told me that I was brave and that Luka was brave for sharing that we had appendicitis.
and I always say, I hope to live to see the day when it is not considered brave to openly talk about depression, anxiety, whatever mental illness it is.
There is a problem. I'm a candle, I met a man who is a woman, I don't know how they put themselves there, now in America they say, die by suicide.
It's a little nicer respect.
You show the man that he died by suicide instead of killed themselves.
Basically, he told me, our Kristina, she was very depressed, but the depression didn't kill her.
Shame killed her.
That gave me goosebumps too, because it is so true, that we can get rid of that shame. We actually have to decide, as humans.
Either we will get rid of the shame, or we will lose even more people.
because you feel ashamed about mental illness, I don't feel any shame, but I'm even more proud that my son doesn't feel ashamed, he talks about it so openly now and he even said that it helps so much because when it's already difficult for you and then you feel ashamed, then everything is even worse or so, so simply accept this is part of me, I didn't choose it, why should you be ashamed?
As he said, I wasn't ashamed when I had a small appendicitis and had to go to the hospital. Why should you be ashamed?
We live too much in what people will think, which I think is the worst question in the world, if I could get rid of one question completely, it would be that. What will people think?
Who are these people? Do they live a perfect life?
Those people who judge are actually the worst people. Why should we care what they think?
What people will think destroys our life, destroys authenticity, destroys how we actually think it is best to raise our child.
How many times do parents really feel they know what's best for their child, but what will people think?
That's awful.
In Croatia, what will the village say?
Yes, yes.
I also grew up with that in Croatia, but I stand by it in America as well.
What will people think?
Yes, I mean, the dynamic is a bit different, for example, when I moved to Zagreb eight years ago, I have not yet experienced here that in the immediate vicinity of my first neighbors, the apartment next to, the apartment above, the apartment below, there is not as much closeness and intimacy as it was when I lived in Osijek, for example.
That. It's as if in these smaller communities people spend more time away from each other.
Maybe there is even that opinion as somehow I don't know if it is expressed or not.
I can't decide at all.
I don't know, but I see the same thing a lot in churches.
Somehow, you have to show yourself in some way in the church, if you have some problems, if your child is not obedient or who knows what, there will be immediate condemnation and criticism and all that, I think, and the church should really be a place where we can show ourselves vulnerable and with all kinds of problems and to know that we are loved.
You reconciled the church something?
Some churches yes, I won't for every one, but like everything in the world there are good churches, there are bad churches with good people, and there are bad people.
Do you think there are bad people?
I think there are unhappy people.
I think there are people who here, those blankets instead of sitting down with a psychotherapist and some good friends and hey, let's unpack all my blankets.
They try to throw it at other people.
You know what, this is yesterday, in the morning I was bragging to my wife about how happy I was.
I found a way to scrape all the comments from any video, insert them into one AI and make a mental map with them, let's say a mindmap.
All comments grouped by topic. And I did that now to prepare this conversation with you.
It was interesting for me to see those positive and negative comments.
And what you mentioned a little before, one of the most common negative comments was why she didn't go to church, why she didn't go to mass, why she didn't turn to God.
Do you make some kind of difference between God and the church, what we as human beings have somehow created in the world, maybe in some respects even the golden calf, as they say in the Bible, we worship about materialism and some other things.
Do you have any contact with spirituality, perhaps? I still can't explain spirituality to myself, but I think it's a level that is deeper than the psychological, it's a mental-emotional level.
Well, I think the same as you. I think that unfortunately people spoil things.
I think that if you look at the messages of Jesus or let's say spirituality in general, it's something wonderful, but people spoil it.
And those comments you said, again, I'm interested if I did some public interview and talked about how my son had cancer and survived it, there certainly wouldn't be a single comment, or let's say again if someone had a heart attack in front of you, you really wouldn't call someone, you wouldn't ask for help, but you would kneel down and pray for him, I really don't see it at that moment, so maybe someone would help him, but you would call him to the hospital and then you would pray and that's the thing, why can't we both, why can't you pray and you can ask for help, definitely why wasn't a person dear to me recently going to confession in church and then the priest asked him how you are with people, that's a pretty good question, that's the most important question, how are you with people, and actually the question we touched on a little while ago, how are you with yourself? You're also human, keep it to yourself. You're human too. Quite a good question because actually a lot of us somehow get caught up in our ambitions, our goals, our life, me, me, a lot of ego and so on.
How are you with people, that's a pretty good question.
A very good question. And there it is again, when you say that, I immediately think of the things that actually helped me the most with onions.
Empathy, knowing eagerness and connection.
We all need that.
Every man needs that from another man.
I don't know that you answered me what your relationship with spirituality is, how you look at it.
Or are you going in that direction, or are you somehow dealing with her, or are you completely fine with this, let's say the mental-emotional aspect?
No, I think spirituality is very important. Now I have somehow, right now I'm in this period of my life, somehow I feel like a student of it, that's the best way to say it.
where I grew up in the church, all I learned was that, that's that, that's the truth, and now somehow for the first time I'm thinking, ok, what is that really?
I'm starting to read more books that aren't the ones I might have read as a child, about Christianity and spirituality.
I mean, I, some people say to me like, that, open your heart.
I say, so how do I open my heart?
I think I opened it, right?
I would actually say that, through my youth, childhood, youth, I have always been perhaps particularly eager to know.
Hmm.
Is it?
And then somehow, actually, when I was a child, my parents took me to church and so on, so I got to know all that, I was bored, that's all, so what am I going to do now?
And then maybe in some middle period, let's say in the last 15-20 years, maybe I opened up to some, as they say today in the mainstream, alternative sources, personal development and some things like that.
now lately I've somehow come back again with the way I know how to philosophically somehow study what is really written in that Bible, which are the teachings of Jesus for example and this symbolism of Jesus on the cross and all these metaphors etc.
I currently look at it that way, in fact I see that everything I was looking for somewhere further was constantly in front of me, actually achieving it in my culture very well explained only the question of how who perceives it, I think that for me for a long time it was more religion than spirituality and that is the difference, I am not interested in religion, I think that people have taken spirituality and somehow corrupted it with too much fear, control of the rules and if that is not the case then it is your fault.
It somehow seems to me that it is actually much more beautiful than how people present it to us. It was as if he had become a businessman.
Yes, yes, it is.
Spirituality has become a business.
100%, yes.
What would you say, I mean, at least my feeling is that today, especially in the Western world, somehow I am leaning on the Western world, so it is more pronounced to me, as if we have some kind of epidemic of mental illnesses.
Do you feel that something is rotten in Western culture, that something is wrong, that actually helps us, stupid to say, or actually makes us suffer and leads us to such problems with mental illnesses?
I mean two things. One thing, I think that mental problems, mental illnesses have always existed, but nobody talked about it. I mean, I remember when I was a teenager, there were people who really needed help, my generation, but it wasn't talked about.
They were either naughty, naughty children who need to be punished, or they are crazy, what are we going to do with them.
So in a way, yes, it's being talked about more and that's actually a good thing, because more people are asking for help.
I often wonder if my son grew up in, say, the 50s, 60s, 70s, would he still be alive?
I'm not sure. I'm not sure about that.
And then of course there are things that can have a negative impact. I think that social networks do not help if you are already having a hard time. I don't know that this is it, that it starts with that, but if it's already difficult for you and you're not careful about what kind of things you follow on social networks, it can certainly make it worse for you.
I don't know, the world is changing. I think that people are somehow more alone on their phones than with people, and we need others to be healthy. I think it is impossible to be isolated and be healthy.
So, yes, a lot of things are changing in the world, which I am certainly influenced by.
But mental illness has always existed, people just haven't...
I think in a way it seems like there's more to it, because people are more open about it.
I would like to close this conversation of ours with the following.
You had a great video called 20 minutes ago.
Thanks?
Can you tell me what it is about?
Yes, um, it's the same in a way that it's real for me, I don't like how much people judge and assume actually and the video starts, I'm with someone small, it's just that it's my little son and he's yelling like that in public in a restaurant and that, really chaos.
And a woman sees him and says, well, that child is spoiled, that child, like that, I immediately criticize.
And I say to that child, come on, come on, choose something sweet.
And now you will give him something sweet when he behaves like that.
How are these parents today?
And then it says, 20 minutes earlier.
And 20 minutes earlier you can see that, I don't know when it is said, the pastor is king.
Well, let's say dila.
A foster child.
Yes, that child, that they called me just now, that some child needs a home and that he was abused before and that it will be very difficult for him.
So, 20 minutes before, I talk to my child, what would you like, do you want to see where your new house is, where you will live with me, do you want to go buy something sweet.
So, they have no idea what happened 20 minutes earlier.
then we see a woman who goes to the store, she has a great car, beautiful, sporty, and a woman passes by her and says oh your car is great, she says thank you and then she sees 20 minutes, no, then she sees herself in the store, sorry, at the same time she pays and pays with it, I don't know how I know her with food coupons and this woman who saw what kind of car I see, you use And you're actually rich. Oh, 20 minutes earlier and we see that woman borrowing a car from her friend because she doesn't have a car and needs to buy food for the children. And then again the last thing, the son is a man who drives unsafely, drives slowly and some people yell at him.
jerk, what's wrong with you?
And then 20 minutes earlier we see him in the hospital and the doctor tells him that his wife died and he says, I don't know how I'm going to tell my children that. And now he was driving home to tell the children.
So, you never know. You never know what happens in someone's life.
Simply, be kind, be good.
It's not hard, it's free.
Thank you Thank you Thank you for the nice service When will you return to Croatia?
In a couple of months Yes Nothing people, see you in a week Hi Thank you